We characterized rare genetic variation in a cohort of 119 individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) using whole genome sequencing. The cases were drawn from the ASPIRE (Autism SPectrum Interdisciplinary REsearch) British Columbia cohort. Individuals in this cohort have been diagnosed with ASD (DSM-IV; ADOS-G/ADI-R) and underwent a detailed standardized phenotyping protocol including morphometrics. We obtained whole genome sequences (Illumina paired-end 100 base pair reads, average depth 30x) for each subject. Variants were called using the Genome Analysis Toolkit (GATK) against the human reference genome, and filtered for quality and rarity in population data. To prioritize variants further, we relied on a combination of existing and in-house bioinformatics tools incorporating both gene-level metrics (genic intolerance to mutation, functional effect prediction) and variant level metrics (population frequency, predicted damage). Our efforts included recurating variants reported in the ASD literature, totalling 4768 variants from 28 publications. We have made the resulting database available as MARVdb (www.chibi.ubc.ca/marvdb). To collaboratively analyzevariants we also applied our general interactive assessment tool, ASPIREdb(aspiredb.chibi.ubc.ca). In total 97 high-priority candidate variants were identified, affecting 66 subjects. All of these variants were heterozygous and all but one were autosomal. Of these, 31 were predicted loss-of-function mutations, 3 affecting genespreviously associated with ASD and 3 affecting genes associated with other neurodevelopmental disorders. A total of 66 candidate MS mutations were prioritised as potentially pathogenic, including 12 affecting literature-associated ASD genes, and 8 affecting genes associated with other neurodevelopmental disorders. High priority variants are being subjected to trio resequencing to assess inheritance. Using this approach we have thus far identified a novel de novo splice site variant in SCN2A,predicted to result in a loss of function, in an individual with severe autism and intellectual disability. This finding adds to the evidence that mutations in this gene can be associated with autism without comorbid seizure disorders.
